---
title: Getting started
---

# Getting Started

## Installation

**Unity 6000.0 or later is required**

### Installation via UPM (Git URL)

Refer to the [Unity documentation](https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.0/Documentation/Manual/upm-ui-giturl.html) and add the
following URL:

``
https://github.com/fireskyvvv/Haikara.git?path=Haikara/Assets/Haikara
``

You can also install by directly editing `Packages/manifest.json`:

```
{
  "dependencies": {
    ...
    "com.katen.haikara": "https://github.com/fireskyvvv/Haikara.git?path=Haikara/Assets/Haikara",
    ...
  }
}
```

### Installation via UnityPackage

Download the .unitypackage from the [releases page](https://github.com/fireskyvvv/Haikara/releases) and extract it in
the Unity Editor.

## Tutorial

### 1. Setting up asmdef

Once Haikara is installed, first set up the [
`Assembly Definition`](https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/assembly-definition-files.html).  
Add `Haikara.Runtime.Core` to the `Assembly Definition References` of the .asmdef you created (or an existing one).  
[todo image]

### 2. Creating the ViewModel class

Create the elements to be bound.  
In Haikara, you can use a class that inherits from [`ViewModelBase`](todo Url) as a ViewModel.  
Create a ViewModel class as shown below (write the namespace to match your environment):

```csharp
using Haikara.Runtime.Core.ViewModel;

namespace Haikara.Samples.FirstSample.Runtime.View
{
    public class FirstSampleViewModel : ViewModelBase
    {
        [CreateProperty] public string Label { get; } = "Hello, Haikara!";        
    }
}
```

#### CreateProperty Attribute

A property to be bound to a VisualElement requires the [
`CreateProperty Attribute`](https://docs.unity3d.com/ScriptReference/Unity.Properties.CreatePropertyAttribute.html).  
Although only a getter is implemented in this example, a setter is required depending on the [
`BindingMode`](https://docs.unity3d.com/ScriptReference/UIElements.BindingMode.html).

### 3. Creating .cs and .uxml files

Create a .cs and .uxml file in any folder included in the .asmdef you created.  
.cs files can be created via `Create > Scripting > Empty C# Script`, and .uxml files via
`Create > UI ToolKit > UI Document`.  
Both files must have the same name.  
The .cs file acts as the code-behind for the .uxml.  
In Haikara, this is called a `View class`.

Here, we create `FirstSample.cs` and `FirstSample.uxml`.  
[todo image]

### 4. Editing .uxml

For elements that require data binding, give them a name.  
By naming them, a list of element names is generated on the View class side, enabling safe identification of target
VisualElements.  
Edit the .uxml as follows. You can edit either via the UI Builder or directly editing the .uxml.  
[todo image]

Example .uxml file:

```xml

<ui:UXML xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns:ui="UnityEngine.UIElements"
         xmlns:uie="UnityEditor.UIElements" noNamespaceSchemaLocation="../../../../../UIElementsSchema/UIElements.xsd">
    <ui:Label text="Label" name="first-sample__label"/>
</ui:UXML>
```

### 5. Editing the View class

The View class requires the following elements:

- **namespace**  
  A namespace is required to link the original View class and the SourceGenerator-generated code one-to-one.

- **partial modifier**  
  Since SourceGenerator will generate code, the View class must be defined as partial.

- **HaikaraUI Attribute**  
  An attribute required to recognize the class as being associated with a .uxml (or .uss) file.  
  See [HaikaraUI Attribute](../source-generation/haikara-ui-attribute.md) for details.

- **Inherit from HaikaraView**
  Inheritance required to generate binding for VisualElements.  
  [HaikaraViewWithViewModel](todo Url) is the HaikaraView class suitable for ViewModel binding.

Edit the View class as follows (write the namespace to match your environment):

```csharp
using Haikara.Runtime.Core;
using Haikara.Runtime.Core.View;

namespace Haikara.Samples.FirstSample.Runtime.View
{
    [HaikaraUI]
    public partial class FirstSample : HaikaraViewWithViewModel<FirstSampleViewModel>
    {
        
    }
}
```

Once written up to this point, you can confirm that the partial class for the View is generated by the
SourceGenerator.  
Confirm that the following code is generated:

- {namespace}.FirstSample.g.cs
- {namespace}.ViewInstaller.g.cs

In [JetBrains Rider](https://www.jetbrains.com/rider/), you can check the generated code under `Dependencies` in the
target assembly (csproj) from the [Project Tool Window](https://pleiades.io/help/rider/Project_Tool_Window.html).  
[image](todo Url)

For details on the generated code, see [View source generation](todo url) and [ViewInstaller](todo url).

### 6. Declaring binding definitions

Declare in the View code which VisualElement to bind to which property on the ViewModel.  
Declare the following [BindableProperty](todo url) in the View class.
You may need to use `using Unity.Properties` and `using UnityEngine.UIElements` as needed.

```csharp
        private static readonly BindableProperty<Label> LabelProperty =
            BindableProperty<Label>.Create(
                bindingId: PropertyPath.FromName(nameof(Label.text)),
                dataSourcePath: PropertyPath.FromName(nameof(FirstSampleViewModel.Label)),
                elementNameInfo: ElementNames.FirstSampleLabel
            );
```

### 7. Running the UI

To actually display the created UI, create a class that inherits from `HaikaraManager` as follows:

```
using Haikara.Runtime.Core;

namespace Haikara.Samples.FirstSample.Runtime
{
    public class FirstSampleManager : HaikaraManager
    {
        protected override async void Initialize(HaikaraUIContext uiContext)
        {
            var view = new View.FirstSample();
            await view.LoadAndAddToAsync(uiDocument.rootVisualElement);
            view.SetDataSource(new FirstSampleViewModel());
        }
    }
}
```

Attach the created class to a GameObject in an appropriate scene that has a UI Document component attached.  
For the UI Document component,
see [here](https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.2/Documentation/Manual/UIE-create-ui-document-component.html).  
[todo image]

When you enter play mode, you should see "Hello, Haikara!" displayed on the label.  
This completes the Haikara tutorial.  
[todo image]

## About file structure

The following file structure is required to generate code corresponding to .uxml and .uss:

```
Assets
└ Scripts
    └ Runtime
        ├ Scripts.Runtime.asmdef
        ├ View.uxml
        └ View.cs
```

- **Scripts,Runtime**  
  The folder name can be anything.

- **Scripts.Runtime.asmdef**  
  An .asmdef must be created for code generation via SourceGenerator.  
  In the `Assembly Definition References` of the .asmdef you created, reference `Haikara.Runtime.Core.asmdef`.  
  Note that the SourceGenerator ignores code in `Assembly-CSharp`, `Assembly-CSharp-Editor`, and assemblies that do not
  reference `Haikara.Core`.

- **View.uxml,View.cs**
  Haikara recognizes .cs and .uxml (or .uss) with the same name (excluding the extension), in the same assembly and at
  the same hierarchy, as corresponding files.  
  In the example above, `View.cs` and `View.uxml` are the corresponding View files.